Replay: add dynamic parameters and update working & structure (#2770)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/debug/system_wide_replay.md

# System-wide Replay

It is possible to record and replay arbitrary parts of the system based on ORB messages.

Replay is useful to test the effect of different parameter values based on real data, compare different estimators, etc.

## Prerequisites

The first step is to identify the module or modules that should be replayed.
Then, identify all the inputs to these modules, i.e. subscribed ORB topics.
For system-wide replay, this consists of all hardware input: sensors, RC input, MAVLink commands and file system.

All identified topics need to be logged at full rate (see [logging](../dev_log/logging.md)).
For `ekf2` this is already the case with the default set of logged topics.

It is important that all replayed topics contain only a single absolute timestamp, which is the automatically generated field `timestamp`.

> Should there be more timestamps, they must be relative with respect to the main timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should there be more timestamps, they must be relative to the main timestamp.
```

For an example, see [SensorCombined.msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/msg/SensorCombined.msg).
Reasons for this are given below.

## Usage

- First, choose the file to replay and build the target (from within the PX4-Autopilot directory):
  
  ```sh
  export replay=<absolute_path_to_log_file.ulg>
  make px4_sitl_default
  ```

>   This will create the output in a separate build directory `build/px4_sitl_default_replay` (so that the parameters don't interfere with normal builds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This will create the build/make output in a separate build directory `build/px4_sitl_default_replay` (so that the parameters don't interfere with normal builds).
```

  It's possible to choose any posix SITL build target for replay, since the build system knows through the `replay` environment variable that it's in replay mode.
- Add ORB publisher rules in the file `build/px4_sitl_default_replay/rootfs/orb_publisher.rules`.
  This file defines which module is allowed to publish which messages.

>   It has the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It has the following format:
  
```

  module: replay
  ignore_others: true
  ```
  
  With this, the modules that usually publish these topics don't need to be disabled for the replay.

- _(Optional)_ Setup parameter overrides (see instructions below).
- _(Optional)_ Copy a `dataman` mission file from the SD card to the build directory.
  This is only necessary if a mission should be replayed.
- Start the replay:

  ```sh
  make px4_sitl_default jmavsim
  ```
  
  This will automatically open the log file, apply the parameters and start the replay.
  Once done, it will report the outcome and exit.
  The newly generated log file can then be analyzed. It can be found in `rootfs/fs/microsd/log`, in subdirectories organised by date.
  Replayed log file names will have the `_replayed` suffix.

  Note that the above command will show the simulator as well, but - depending on what is being replayed - it will not show what's actually going on.
  It is still possible to connect via QGC and, for example, view the changing attitude during replay.

- Finally, unset the environment variable, so that the normal build targets are used again:

  ```sh
  unset replay
  ```

> ### Overriding parameters in the original log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Overriding Parameters in the Original Log
```

All identified topics need to be logged at full rate (see [logging](../dev_log/logging.md)).
For `ekf2` this is already the case with the default set of logged topics.

It is important that all replayed topics contain only a single absolute timestamp, which is the automatically generated field `timestamp`.
Should there be more timestamps, they must be relative to the main timestamp.
For an example, see [SensorCombined.msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/msg/SensorCombined.msg).
Reasons for this are given below.

## Usage

- First, choose the file to replay and build the target (from within the PX4-Autopilot directory):
  
  ```sh
  export replay=<absolute_path_to_log_file.ulg>
  make px4_sitl_default
  ```
  This will create the build/make output in a separate build directory `build/px4_sitl_default_replay` (so that the parameters don't interfere with normal builds).
  It's possible to choose any posix SITL build target for replay, since the build system knows through the `replay` environment variable that it's in replay mode.
- Add ORB publisher rules in the file `build/px4_sitl_default_replay/rootfs/orb_publisher.rules`.

>   This file defines which module is allowed to publish which messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This file defines the modules that are allowed to publish particular messages.
```

  It has the following format:
  
  ```
  restrict_topics: <topic1>, <topic2>, ..., <topicN>
  module: <module>
  ignore_others: <true/false>

>   ```

Reviewer: 1. Can you only define one module? I.e what if you want to define several modules and restrictions?

2. My understanding is that these publisher rules are optional - you could just play the log file your recorded. You add publisher rules because (from below) "the modules that usually publish these topics don't need to be disabled for the replay." . I'm not sure I get this - why do you want to disable publications from one place and not the other?

Author: 1. That is something I am not actually sure of - I have not tried it.

2. The rules probably are optional. That said, in the case of the EKF2 replay at least, the `replay` module republishes certain topics directly from the log. In this case, we want the module that originally published them to _not_ publish them such that there is only one source of those messages. These other modules can keep running, but if they publish on those topics we ignore it.

Reviewer: Ah. That makes sense. Looking forward to an update, when and if you are able.

  This means that the given list of topics should only be published by `<module>` (which is the command name).
  Publications to any of these topics from another module are silently ignored.
  If `ignore_others` is `true`, publications to other topics from `<module>` are ignored.

  For replay, we only want the `replay` module to be able to publish the previously identified list of topics.
  So, for replaying `ekf2`, the rules file should look like this:
  
  ```
  restrict_topics: sensor_combined, vehicle_gps_position, vehicle_land_detected
  module: replay
  ignore_others: true
  ```
  
  With this, the modules that usually publish these topics don't need to be disabled for the replay.

> - _(Optional)_ Setup parameter overrides (see instructions below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _(Optional)_ Setup parameter overrides (see [instructions below](#overriding-parameters-in-the-original-log)).
```

- _(Optional)_ Copy a `dataman` mission file from the SD card to the build directory.
  This is only necessary if a mission should be replayed.
- Start the replay:

  ```sh

>   make px4_sitl_default jmavsim

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we should change to `make px4_sitl gz_x500`. jMAVSim is not getting much love currently. Something to think about for next iteration.

  ```
  
  This will automatically open the log file, apply the parameters and start the replay.
  Once done, it will report the outcome and exit.
  The newly generated log file can then be analyzed. It can be found in `rootfs/fs/microsd/log`, in subdirectories organised by date.
  Replayed log file names will have the `_replayed` suffix.

  Note that the above command will show the simulator as well, but - depending on what is being replayed - it will not show what's actually going on.
  It is still possible to connect via QGC and, for example, view the changing attitude during replay.

- Finally, unset the environment variable, so that the normal build targets are used again:

  ```sh
  unset replay
  ```

### Overriding Parameters in the Original Log

By default, all parameters from the original log file are applied during a replay.
If a parameter changes during recording, it will be changed at the right time during the replay.

Parameters can be overridden during a replay in two ways: _fixed_ and _dynamic_.

> If an overridden parameter changes in the log, this change will not be applied in the replay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When parameters are overridden, corresponding parameter changes in the log are not applied during replay.
```

To enable recording for EKF replay you must set the parameters to enable a [single EKF instance](../advanced_config/tuning_the_ecl_ekf.md#running-a-single-ekf-instance).
:::

In EKF2 mode, the replay will automatically create the ORB publisher rules described above.

To perform an EKF2 replay:

> - Record the original log. Optionally set `SDLOG_MODE` to `1` to log from boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Record the original log.
  Optionally set `SDLOG_MODE` to `1` to log from boot.
```

- In addition to the `replay` environment variable, set `replay_mode` to `ekf2`:

  ```sh
  export replay_mode=ekf2
  export replay=<absolute_path_to_log.ulg>
  ```

- Run the replay with the `none` target:

  ```sh
  make px4_sitl none
  ```

- Once finished, unset both `replay` and `replay_mode`.

  ```sh
  unset replay; unset replay_mode
  ```

> ### Adjusting EKF2-specific parameters for the replay

Reviewer: FYI We use first letter of each word capitalization, with normal exceptions.

```suggestion
### Adjusting EKF2-specific Parameters for the Replay
```
